According to the World Health Organisation (WHO), depression affects more than 300 million people across the world and close to 800,000 people die due to suicide caused by depression every year.
It is a condition which has the power to bind you within its cocoon-like walls and can make one feel internally and mentally suffocated and confined. At its worst, depression can lead to suicide.
With many people coming out into the open about their respective battles with depression, the condition is slowly gaining the awareness it requires, inspiring more and more people to take it seriously.
However, a study has warned heart patients about the dangers of depression on their health. According to the study, heart disease patients are twice as likely to suffer an early death if they suffer from depression.
Researchers tracked more than 24,000 patients for 10 years and found that post-coronary artery disease depression was the single biggest predictor of death.
Lead author Dr Heidi May said that no matter how long or how short it was, patients were found to have twice the risk of dying compared to those who did not have a follow-up diagnosis of depression.
May stated that depression was the strongest risk factor for dying, compared to any other risk factors we evaluated, including age, heart failure, diabetes, high blood pressure, kidney failure, or having a heart attack or stroke.
That remained the case even after they adjusted for factors such as age, race, diabetes, or high blood pressure.
The team analysed 24,138 patients, who underwent angiographies, which determined they had coronary artery disease.
To detect subsequent depression, the researchers used standardised diagnostic coding system.
The patients with depression were placed into subcategories based on how long after their heart disease diagnosis the depression was identified.
In all, 15 percent, or 2,646 patients, were diagnosed with depression at some point during follow-up.
Of those, most of them (37 percent) were diagnosed with depression for more than five years after their first heart event, but the two diagnosis were linked.
The second most likely scenario was being diagnosed within a year of the first heart event, which was the case for 27 percent of patients with depression.
The rest were diagnosed between one and five years after their first event.
According to researchers there are hormonal changes and electro-functioning changes which affect the heart's functioning as people who suffer depression have reduced levels of serotonin released in their brain.
Dr May said emphasized the importance of continual screening of depression for all heart disease patients and said that the patients who have depression need to be treated for it to improve not only their long-term risks but their quality of life.
The research appears in European Heart Journal.
Cardiovascular disease can trigger depression; counseling and medication can help beat it.
When someone has a heart attack, heart surgery or stroke, the immediate concern obviously is physical health.
Once survivors start down the road to recovery, it’s important to monitor their mental health, too.
While an estimated 1 in 10 of Americans ages 18 and older report depression, studies show that up to 33 percent of heart attack patients end up developing some degree of depression, said Barry Jacobs, Psy.D., a clinical psychologist and director of Behavioral Sciences at the Crozer-Keystone Family Medicine Residency Program in Springfield, Pa.
“The big message is that people need to be aware of this connection,” said Dr. Jacobs, who is also an American Heart Association volunteer. “The second message is that many treatments are available. No one needs to suffer.”
Signs and Symptoms
It makes sense that someone would be sad after being diagnosed with or while recovering from heart disease or stroke. But how long it lasts, and how debilitating it becomes, indicates whether someone is processing natural feelings (such as general sadness or fear of facing mortality) or slipping into a depressed state.
Depression doesn’t show up on an X-ray, like a broken bone. It has to be detected through behaviors and attitude.
“We don’t expect everyone to get off course in their lives,” Dr. Jacobs said. “Most people don’t – but some people do. If you are one of those people who just can’t get it going anymore – you don’t feel like getting out of bed and facing the day or you are irritable all the time – those are signs that maybe your response is depressive.”
The best indicator: Do you have the same zest for life you used to have?
“Have they stopped playing guitar, seeing friends, reading the newspaper?” Dr. Jacobs said. “If they are not enjoying the things that used to give them pleasure, that is a sign that should not be ignored.”
Other indicators are sleeping and eating; too much or too little of either could be troublesome.
What can be done?
The best start is meeting with a primary care physician. Your doctor can provide a nine-question screening test that is “very accurate in diagnosing depression, especially major depression,” Dr. Jacobs said.
The primary care physician will determine whether a mental-health specialist is needed and recommend one if necessary.
Depression and anxiety are among the 10 most-common diagnoses in primary care, so your physician is likely to have experience in this area.
“I think we do a better job diagnosing depression than we did a decade or two ago,” Dr. Jacobs said. “Mental-health problems are less stigmatized now. People also have a better appreciation that the mind and body work together. If we want our bodies to work well, we need to get our minds in order.”
Treatment Options
The best ways to beat depression are counseling, medication or – in many cases – both.
“The most common counseling looks at the thoughts people have that subconsciously affect their mood,” Dr. Jacobs said. “Are those thoughts rational or not? For instance, one such thought might be, `If I get stressed out at all, I’m going to die.’ Those people may withdraw from life because they fear it’s going to be too much. But that also ends up cutting them off from sources of nurturance.”
Patients may be taught ways to relax and relieve stress, such as breathing exercises or meditation.
A variety of mood-lifting medicines are another common option.
“The combination of medicine and counseling probably has the highest success rate,” Dr. Jacobs said.
Benefits of Treating, Risks of Not Treating
Depression can make physical problems worse. A depressed person is less likely to take care of physical health, cutting back on or skipping rehabilitation exercises and/or taking medication. Dr. Jacobs described this as “inertia taking hold.”
Once depression is treated, and a person’s energy and activity level increases, quality of life will rise, too.
So it’s all about taking that first step.
“The quicker we can identify people who have depression that is complicating the ability to get back to life and enjoy life, the better the chances of recovery,” Dr. Jacobs said. “We don’t want depression to get in the way of full physical recovery.
“The age-old advice is having a sound mind and a sound body. People have to work at that, especially after a heart attack. The goal is to live right, eat right and have a good attitude.”
 
Economists would argue that demonetisation does little to curb black money, especially the reasons and practices that lead to its creation and accumulation. At best, it could help destroy a very small part of the black economy that is managed through cash. The fear of scrutiny may keep such people as real estate and construction contractors, traders and retailers, who hold a large part of their illegal wealth in cash, from turning over their dodgy holdings to banks. They will be forced to destroy a good part of it, a loss that will hurt them for a long time.

Given that these groups of people — the hardest hit by the surprise ban on 1,000- and 500-rupee notes — have been the ruling BJP’s loyal voters for decades, many analysts wonder if Prime Minister Narendra Modi just committed a political blunder. Known to be a meticulous planner, Modi rarely makes a decision that is not well-thought-out. It is unlikely that he wouldn’t have factored in the fallout — especially the risk of alienating the BJP’s traditional support base.

What then explains his gamble?

To see the political rationale behind Modi’s demonetisation move, we need to understand the social re-engineering of the BJP in recent times. Once known as an upper-caste, Brahmin-Bania party, Modi’s BJP today is socially much diversified and nurtures ambitions of being a national party with credible influence across all social groups, especially those dominating the electoral arithmetic. This means there will be times when its actions will counter the interests of its traditional supporters, but the party will have to forge ahead. In opting for demonetisation, Modi has done just that.

And this is not the first time Modi has ignored the interests of BJP’s core support base. The levy of 1% excise duty on non-silver jewellery in this year’s budget, relaxing FDI rules for multi-brand retailing and, above all, the push for a unified goods and services tax (GST) that would tighten the noose around the traders are examples of how Modi’s actions are no longer bound by the compulsions that once guided Advani’s BJP. With big business and the super-rich firmly on his side, Modi does not need funds from traders and contractors to run his party. And to win elections, the BJP knows by now that its traditional vote base is not good enough. The 2015 assembly elections in Delhi, a city-state run by Brahmins and Banias, showed how the underclass can turn the tables. The BJP’s electoral wins elsewhere bear this out. They have come on the back of a social realignment that now makes the BJP the party with the biggest representation of backward castes (OBCs) — a change that reflects in both the changing power equations within the party and the composition of BJP-ruled governments. One out of three in Modi’s council of ministers is an OBC and four of BJP state units saw their Brahmin presidents go this year, making way for new leaders from lower castes.

One could still ask how demonetisation helps the underclass. Well, it doesn’t, not in the immediate context. On the contrary, the possible value destruction in the cash-driven informal sectors of the economy and a consequent contraction in demand will result in slowing growth and shrinking incomes, mostly for those at the bottom of the economic ladder. The move adds to the woes of labour intensive industries and services such as construction and retail trade. A clear winner from this will be the government. Any currency held by public is a liability on the books of the Reserve Bank of India. Hence, when any cash in circulation is destroyed and cannot be claimed, it helps cut RBI’s liability, add to its profit and, therefore, also add to the government exchequer. The RBI can print new notes in place of those destroyed and these can be brought into circulation without any inflationary impact. To that extent these would help soften interest rates and push up demand, but that will happen only in the longer term. In the short term, however, liquidity will be hit, so will be demand, especially in sectors that generate most jobs for the poor and marginalised.

Yet, the have-nots appear to have endorsed the PM’s decision. The cash hoarded by their immediate employers and exploiters is the most familiar imagery of black money for them. Hence, when that dodgy cash is destroyed they feel empowered. That is why they are cheering demonetisation, although they stand to benefit little from it.

There have also been suggestions that the chaos and hardship following the ban of 1,000- and 500-rupee notes, which account for 86% of the money in circulation, might undo the popular response that Modi’s decision got. In a country where citizens go without water and electricity for days, where standing in long queues is a daily routine for many, it would be naive to say the transitory inconvenience will have a political bearing.

Prime Minister Modi’s call for a ‘celebration of integrity’ through a sudden demonetization of Rs. 500 and Rs.1000 currency notes, much like his earlier schemes like the Jan Dhan Yojana, is yet another ‘jumla’. But if the opening of millions of ‘zero balance’ bank accounts under the Jan Dhan Yojana was a harmless gimmick, the ill-conceived monetary experiment this time may actually end up inflicting some costs on the public.

The temporary proscription of currency notes of higher denomination is supposedly aimed at rendering the presently held stocks of black money and counterfeit currency worthless. What is noteworthy is that it neither makes any difference to the generation of black money through myriad channels, nor does it touch that part of the stock of black money held in other forms of assets like benami properties in land and real estate, gold, foreign currency, offshore bank accounts, etc.

Nobody knows how much of illicit wealth in the country is stashed in wads of Rs. 500 and Rs.1000 currency notes. One can only guess that it would be the petty brokers, wheeler-dealers and thieves who store their ill-gotten wealth in that fashion, besides mainstream political parties and politicians like the ones seen in the Tehelka or Narada tapes. The big fish have long devised much more sophisticated ways of stashing or laundering their money. Hence the current demonetization is unlikely to touch anything more than a miniscule fraction of the present stock of black money in India.

To the extent it will succeed, the stocks of illicit wealth are likely to be only destroyed but not unearthed or confiscated, nor the illegalities punished. Given such uncertain and measly benefits, the costs of demonetization are significant.

First, a disruptive shock has already been delivered to the cash-transactions based economy, which has particularly affected the lives of the rural and urban poor, who eke out a living in the vast informal economy, besides inconveniencing a significant section of the middle classes who are yet to get included in the world of cashless transactions. The impact of this is certainly short-term and transitory, but whether this shock was necessary at all is questionable, given the elusive benefits.

Second, the move may just end up increasing the proportion of other assets like benami property, gold, dollars etc. in which black money is held and diversify the market for money laundering instruments, making it even more difficult to detect. Third, given the fact that new Rs. 500 and Rs.2000 currency notes will now be introduced to replace the proscribed currencies, the RBI will have to incur significant costs of printing a very large volume of currency notes. Moreover, if high denomination currencies are really the problem, why replace the Rs. 1000 denomination with Rs. 2000, which will make it even easier to build fresh stocks of black money?

There is no guarantee that the high denomination currency notes won’t be faked again, given that the agency and technology of counterfeit Indian currency notes remain unearthed. As for the contribution of this move to combating terrorism, it is a red herring. The role of opaque instruments like Participatory Notes, used by FIIs operating in the Indian stock market, are more relevant for financing terrorism than Indian currency notes of high denomination.

The real problems ailing the Indian economy lie elsewhere. The amount of stressed loans in the Indian banking system has crossed a whopping Rs. 9 lakh crore, a bulk of which is owed by domestic corporates to the public sector banks, causing a huge debt overhang. Despite doubtful claims of fast economic growth, revenue mobilisation has not shown any signs of improvement and consequently, redistributive policies have been rolled back.

Under the Modi regime, substantive measures to promote investments, economic growth, revenues and welfare expenditure have been supplanted by gimmicks, PR spins and a brazen pursuit of select corporate interests. The latest instance of a conflict of interest lies in today’s full page newspaper advertisements by an online payment service provider congratulating the Prime Minister for the demonetization announcement.
 
When Donald Trump directed his administration to declare America’s opioid overdose crisis a public health emergency, Republicans swiftly praised his “bold national leadership”.
But with no new funding, many public health experts and state officials said it was “magical thinking” to imagine that the declaration would stem the tide of opioid overdoses that has already killed 183,000.
Analysis America's opioid crisis: how prescription drugs sparked a national trauma
Aggressive marketing of painkillers made from opium poppy led to a generation of addicts and the deaths of almost 100 people a day from overdoses
 
Read more
“We need more resources,” said Dr Jay Butler, chief medical officer for the state of Alaska, who was at the White House for Trump’s announcement. Butler said the president’s speech sounded “a call for an opioids moonshot, but in order to focus resources, you need resources”.
Announcing the measure, Trump called on Americans to come together as a national family, and laid out a sweeping call for reform, though it mostly lacked specifics.
“The federal government is aggressively fighting the opioid epidemic on all fronts,” Trump told a crowd of addiction survivors, Congress members and law enforcement officials at the White House. “We can be the generation that ends the opioid epidemic. We can do it.”
In addition to a national health emergency, Trump announced an intention to sue pharmaceutical companies; to pull an “evil” opioid from the market; to create an addiction education campaign for youth; and to build a wall on the southern border of the United States.
He also called for a public-private partnership between scientists at the National Institutes of Health and drug companies to develop non-addictive painkillers, and pledged to suspend an obscure provision of federal law that bars public funds from paying for addiction treatment in facilities with more than 16 beds.
The president’s proposals heartened some. “We went into it hopeful that it would be a comprehensive strategy, and it was just that.” said Jessica Nickel, president of the Addiction Policy Forum. “Using the public health emergency route makes a lot of sense. This is a health condition, an illness.”
But it was what the president left out of his announcement that most frustrated many addiction treatment advocates.
 Five things Trump could do right now to ease the opioid crisis
Joanna Walters
 
 
Read more
Trump failed to call for more funding; stopped short of declaring a more sweeping national emergency as he had promised and his own White House commission recommended; and declared the emergency as his administration attacks public health insurance for the poor.
Jeff Levi, professor of health policy at George Washington University, said it was simply “not true” that the federal government was using all the tools at its disposal.
“Declaring a public health emergency brings no new resources to the table, and there is a broad consensus in the public health community that we need additional resources for prevention, harm reduction and treatment,” said Levi.
Advertisement
The public health emergency Trump announced is technically declared by the US health and human services secretary, Eric Hargan. It will allow people to receive addiction treatment through telemedicine. It will also make federal grants for HIV and for displaced workers available to combat the opioid epidemic. It also gives the health secretary access to the health emergency fund.
However, the public health emergency fund has a balance of only $57,000, and some experts were concerned using funds dedicated to HIV could mean robbing Peter to pay Paul.
Further, because public health emergency declarations are typically used to cut red tape after natural disasters or during disease outbreaks, they expire after 90 days. The declaration will then have to be renewed.
“It’s not a proposal, it’s not a plan,” said Dr Andrew Kolodny, executive director of Physicians for Responsible Opioid Prescribing and co-director of opioid policy research at Brandeis University. “If Trump is serious, this afternoon we’ll hear an appropriations request, I believe, in the billions.”
“You want – in every county – to be able to walk into a treatment center and on that same day access treatment,” Kolodny said, “regardless of their ability to pay for it.” He estimated a request to “build out” an addiction treatment network in the US would cost $6bn.
James Hodge, an Arizona State University public health law professor, said declaring a public health emergency, not a national emergency, was “a real missed opportunity”.
“Failing to do that against the backdrop of his own White House commission, it’s hard to understand,” Hodge said. “That’s not, in my view, the president taking the opioid crisis seriously enough.
“States and localities will be struggling to figure out why the federal government is not taking this more seriously,” said Hodge.
Butler, who will be looking at the declaration’s details in his own state, said: “To think we can do a lot more without any new resources is really magical thinking.”
In one of the most shocking U.S. elections in modern political history, Donald Trump has defeated Hillary Clinton.
"I pledge to every citizen of our land that I will be president for all Americans," Trump said in his victory speech after the Associated Press called the race for him at 2:30 am Wednesday morning. Striking a conciliatory tone, Trump continued, "For those who have chosen not to support me in the past, of which there were a few people, I’m reaching out to you for your guidance and your help so we can work together and unify our great country."
He also said Hillary Clinton had called him to concede the race. "Hillary has worked very long and very hard over a long period of time, and we owe her a major debt of gratitude for her service to our country," he said. "I mean that very sincerely."
RELATED
 
WHITE HOUSE'Totally Unhinged.' Trump Fires Back at California Billionaire Campaigning for His Impeachment
Trump’s upset was one he had been predicting for months, gleefully comparing himself to the Brexit votein England. Yet it was one that almost no other major predictors foresaw, all giving Clinton various degrees of comfortable leads in their election day predictions.
“It was Donald Trump versus almost all the experts … it looks like Donald Trump was right,” Jake Tapper said on CNN at 10:40 pm on election night (before major battleground states had been called).
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Leslie Rossi sits outside of her "Trump House" in Youngstown, Pa. She says thousands of people check out the house every
... VIEW MORE

Leslie Rossi
1 of 8
Trump, a reality television star and political neophyte, upended every rule in the book to clinch his victory. He bested 15 other candidates in the Republican primary, most of whom were governors and senators. “One of [Donald] Trump’s real sources of strength is not just that he took the fight to the elites in an abstract way, but that he was the one guy on a stage of 16 candidates who really seemed culturally disconnected from the other candidates,” J.D. Vance, author of Hillbilly Elegy, told TIME before the general election.
In the general election, Trump didn’t run his campaign in any sort of traditional way. He was outspent in campaign ads by Clinton by 3 to 1, and he had a small, disorganized ground game up against the Clinton election machine. TIME wrote two separate cover stories about the meltdowns and disarray inside the Trump campaign. Not to mention the candidate’s freewheeling, bombastic speaking style and penchant for engaging in Twitter fights with Gold Star families and former beauty pageant contestants.
But throughout his campaign, Trump openly flouted convention and touted his success in tapping into a populist vein in the country that no other candidates had been able to effectively access. “This is a movement,” Trump would tell his followers who showed up by the tens of thousands to see him speak. Many supported him from their anger and their sense that the country needs a big change, that the way government works is broken. In the final days of his campaign Trump began using the the slogan "drain the swamp" to talk about the nation's capitol, which he said crowds loved.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
People cast their votes at Echo Park Pool on Nov. 8, 2016, in Los Angeles.
Jae C. Hong—AP
1 of 10
Trump’s victory exposed real divisions and new fault lines in the American populace, as he was on track to win huge majorities of non-college educated whites, while winning less of college-educated whites, who are normally reliably Republican. The fight between the first female major party candidate and the man accused of sexually assaulting women also turned into a referendum on gender; “what women can be, and what men can get away with,” as TIME put it in the cover story the week before the election.
"There’s going to be a schism of some sort," former Republican Gov. Bill Weld, who ran as the vice presidential candidate on the Libertarian ticket this election, told TIME before the election.
As president, Trump has promised he will build a wall along the border with Mexico, suspend the Syrian refugee resettlement program, repeal and replace the Affordable Care Act and renegotiate NAFTA. His election, coupled with Republican control of Congress, will also likely put a new conservative Supreme Court justice in the seat vacated by the late Justice Antonin Scalia.
Conventional wisdom said everything from demographics to campaign infrastructure would keep Donald Trump from ever reaching the White House and making good on these goals. But Trump told his followers not to believe the polls showing him down and promised the pundits that there were secret Trump voters out there. "100%" his campaign manager Kellyanne Conway tweeted early Wednesday morning before the election was called, in response to a Washington Post writer tweeting, "There was a silent Trump vote. A big one."



Among the arguments one keeps hearing on TV debates, often not the best places to find economic literacy, is that demonetisation will not make any difference since only 5-6% of black money is in cash. Another criticism is that the government simply did not plan well for the fallout and that millions are queuing up before banks and ATMs, causing needless inconvenience to the ordinary citizen and disrupting everyday cash-based transactions.

The government has rejected the second argument by simply citing the need for secrecy. And it is by and large correct. The only way to be better prepared for a situation in which 80% of your currency will be rendered invalid is to have new notes ready in advance, and by reconfiguring the ATMs in advance. Neither effort could have been kept a secret, for ATMs are serviced by hundreds of engineers, and software and logistics service providers. Printing more ?500 notes in advance would also have been an option, but scores, if not hundreds of people in the Reserve Bank of India, the finance ministry, and the currency printing presses would have been in the know.

Read |?Cong says ?2,000 note illegal, accuses PM Modi of ‘financial anarchy’

Now, to the larger point raised by critics, that junking high denomination currency is the worst way to attack black money, since cash constitutes only a small fraction of the total stock (and flows) of black money.

Let’s assume that the critics are right about 5% being the likely proportion of black money in the economy. The bulk is in real estate and gold. The flaw in this argument is this: Every illegal real estate deal has a cash component. So 100% of such deals depend on cash.

Then there is the issue of velocity of money movement in illegal deals. Physical cash may be just 5% of deals, but when deals happen multiple times, the same 5% passes through many hands, expanding the level of tax evasion multifold. Cash is the grease needed to facilitate tax-evaded transactions, and if you want to apply the brakes, mixing sand in the grease is a good beginning. This stalls, at least temporarily, the black money engine.

The operative word in the above sentence is “temporarily”. Demonetisation is not the end, but only the beginning. The logical next question thus is: What next?

Read | Demonetisation: Modi has banked on personal equity to effect behaviour change

There are several answers to this question, especially real estate and gold, where black money is rampant. However, these are not the right places to begin for the simple reason that they can be even more disruptive than demonetisation. Real estate is very closely enmeshed with the entire financial system, and any major damage here can destabilise the economy. Consider the collateral damage: Banks are highly exposed to real estate and home loans; if you attack benami real estate aggressively, property prices will crash, and banks will have to force home buyers to either pay more EMIs or shorten their tenures or bring in more margin money. Moreover, their bad loan problem will get worse. And let’s not forget, the entire core sector — from cement to steel and power — is linked to real estate and construction. So real estate black money will have to be defanged in stages. No surgical strike is possible.

The same applies to gold, which employs lakhs of workers in design and handcrafting of gems and jewellery and is easy to hide. Ferreting out anyone’s hidden gold wealth means invading the privacy of homes — the worst form of tax terrorism possible. Gold-linked black money can be reduced only by bringing the jewellery business into the formal system of taxation, which is what the GST system will do. We should leave the gold business to GST.

Ads by ZINC

Read | Azad refuses to apologise, Cong dares PM?to join demonetisation debate

The logical and only consistent long-term way of eliminating black money in any sphere is to promote transparency and coaxing citizens to move away from cash (through digital and web-based payments). Any interface where a citizen has to face a government official and pay fees or taxes in cash needs to be eliminated; this means e-payments must become the norm for registrar offices (for stamp duty, marriage certificates, home registration, etc), traffic violations, issue of trucking permits, highway tolls, et al. Only when the citizen-government interface is eliminated will the tendency of officialdom to demand bribes for speeding up processes reduce.

We have already seen this happen with train ticketing and tax payments. Both Centre and states need to take this to every possible area of citizen-government interface.

The way to tackle real estate corruption and black money is to make all processes — building and environmental permissions, floor-space index (FSI) rules — transparent and time-bound. Big money is generated in real estate primarily in two ways: Politicians and bureaucrats demanding bribes for building permits by using their powers to delay; and through the adoption of arbitrary FSI policies. Mumbai land prices are kept artificially high by maintaining low FSI. The minute the FSI is raised, land prices may crash, making mass housing viable. When these decisions are made rule-based and non-discretionary, netas and babus will lose their ability to demand bribes, most of which comes in the form of benami property ownership.

Unfortunately, these reforms depend on states, and not the central government. Prime Minister Narendra Modi has to prod the state governments to move faster on this front.

Read | Demonetisation: Why India’s poor will no longer believe the news

The Gangotri of black money is election funding. Modi talked of reforms in this area. Some commentators wonder if the money can be found for full State funding of polls. The answer is yes. If you end the MPLADS scheme, you get ?20,000 crore every five years. Or you could add a cess of, say, 0.1-0.3% to GST. It would be enough to finance all polls at the Centre and states. Money is not the problem. Political will is.
